A Beginner’s Guide to Implementing CDISC SDTM and ADaM Standards with Open-Source R Packages (#308)
pharmaverse/blog: posts/2025-05-12_faster_clinical_trial_reporting/faster_clinical_trial_reporting.qmd

### Cost and Efficiency Challenges

Clinical trials are expensive, often exceeding hundreds of millions of dollars, and this can limit the development of drugs for rare diseases. Failure in any phase of these trials can incur huge losses, compounded by the complex and varying nature of global regulations around them.

### Data and Reproducibility Concerns

Reproducibility is key for independent verification of clinical trial results. Differences in data collection methods, formats and methodologies often hinder cross-study comparisons, especially if a study was not designed with international standards that are consistent, and reproducible. If you'd like to hear some direct industry insights on Clinical Trials, check out this podcast on [Why Clinical Trials Fail: Lessons from Two Decades in Pharma](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UXfUUA1vo4I&list=PLexAKolMzPcpRNtpwdAwRO9fCxAdwDauo)

## Pharmaceutical Standards

> The **Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC)** provides globally accepted data standards, which are a set of guidelines and models used to standardize the collection, exchange, and analysis of clinical trial data. These standards aim to improve efficiency, data quality, and interoperability across various clinical research areas.

Reviewer: link here to [cdisc.org](https://www.cdisc.org/)?

A more comprehensive list of packages can be found here: <https://pharmaverse.org/e2eclinical/>

Can’t wait to get your hands on some Pharmaverse tools? We got you covered! [https://www.appsilon.com/post/pharmaverse-tools-for-clinical-trials](https://hubs.ly/Q03m5bG30){.uri}

## Data Pipeline

In Clinical Trial Reporting, the data pipeline follows this standard:

![](images/1.png)

The raw data from patients is collected according to CDASH guidelines, then processed with SDTM and ADaM standards to produce related Tables, Listings, and Graphs/Figures outputs that correspond to all aspects of a specific clinical trial.

Starting with the [CDASH data](https://www.cdisc.org/kb/ecrf) from a study, the preparation process starts with `sdtm.oak` and `sdtmchecks` packages from the Pharmaverse in order to get them ready for SDTM formatted datasets.

Subsequently, ADaM standards are applied on this data using the `admiral` package, which can then be analysed and transformed into Tables, Listings, and Graphs/Figures using non-pharmaverse (but still related) packages such as `rtables` and `tern`.

![](images/2.png)

> The Pharmaverse contains some repositories with test data that can help visualize and make sense of this, namely [`pharmaversesdtm`](https://pharmaverse.github.io/pharmaversesdtm/) and [`pharmaverseadam`](https://pharmaverse.github.io/pharmaverseadam/)`.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pharmaverse contains some repositories with test data that can help visualize and make sense of this, namely [`pharmaversesdtm`](https://pharmaverse.github.io/pharmaversesdtm/) and [`pharmaverseadam`](https://pharmaverse.github.io/pharmaverseadam/)`.
```

split_fun <- drop_split_levels
```

#### AET02 Output Generation:

```         
# Standard Table for AET02 --------------------------------------------------------------
lyt <- basic_table(show_colcounts = TRUE) %>%
  split_cols_by(var = "ACTARM") %>%
  add_overall_col(label = "All Patients") %>%
  analyze_num_patients(
    vars = "USUBJID",
    .stats = c("unique", "nonunique"),
    .labels = c(
      unique = "Total number of patients with at least one adverse event",
      nonunique = "Overall total number of events"
    )
  ) %>%
  split_rows_by(
    "AEBODSYS",
    child_labels = "visible",
    nested = FALSE,
    split_fun = split_fun,
    label_pos = "topleft",
    split_label = obj_label(adae$AEBODSYS)
  ) %>%
  summarize_num_patients(
    var = "USUBJID",
    .stats = c("unique", "nonunique"),
    .labels = c(
      unique = "Total number of patients with at least one adverse event",
      nonunique = "Total number of events"
    )
  ) %>%
  count_occurrences(
    vars = "AEDECOD",
    .indent_mods = -1L
  ) %>%
  append_varlabels(adae, "AEDECOD", indent = 1L)

result <- build_table(lyt, df = adae, alt_counts_df = adsl)

result
```

### Listings

> In this example, we will be creating a ***Standard Listing of Preferred Terms, Lowest Level Terms, and Investigator-Specified Adverse Event Terms*** ***(AEL01)*** using the c`adae` dataset from the `random.cdisc.data` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we will be creating a ***Standard Listing of Preferred Terms, Lowest Level Terms, and Investigator-Specified Adverse Event Terms*** ***(AEL01)*** using the `cadae` dataset from the `random.cdisc.data` package.
```

```         
# Standard Plot for FSTG02 -------------------------------------------------------
anl1 <- anl

df <- extract_survival_subgroups(
  variables = list(tte = "AVAL", is_event = "is_event", arm = "ARM", subgroups = c("SEX", "BMRKR2")),
  data = anl1
)

result <- basic_table() %>%
  tabulate_survival_subgroups(
    df = df,
    vars = c("n_tot", "n", "median", "hr", "ci"),
    time_unit = anl1$AVALU[1]
  )

result

plot <- g_forest(tbl = result)

plot
```

More specifics on these outputs can be found in the [TLG-Catalog](https://insightsengineering.github.io/tlg-catalog/stable/).

Did you know that validating R Shiny applications is critical in the pharmaceutical industry? Want to know more? [Read on in this blog post.](https://hubs.li/Q03m5zwM0)\

## Conclusion

Clinical Trial Reporting is a tried and tested process that is necessary not only to foster trust in the pharmaceutical industry, but also to ensure that the future of humanity is safeguarded through reliable drug development procedures.

With the help of Open Source, R, and similar initiatives, the level of trust and transparency can be moved even further and public welfare can be assured.

> Join us in part 2 of this series where we take a look at interactive clinical trials data analysis using packages that create custom shiny applications specifically for this space.

Reviewer: Is some link missing here?

Author: The blog post hasn't been published yet, so when it's ready, I could insert the link.
